
# Who Is the DevOps Coach?  {#section-1}

*"Skillful pilots gain their reputation from storms and tempests."*

#### Epictetus 50-135 AD 


# 1. It Was the Best of Times. {#chapter-1}

To understand the role of the DevOps Coach it is first necessary to where where the idea of both DevOps and Agile originated. The '90s. 

Between March 1991 and March 2001, the U.S. economy experienced the longest recorded expansion of its history. Times were good, in fact, for anyone working in technology the '90s felt like a genuine gold rush. 1994 until 2001 was the era of the dot-com bubble; the bubble didn't burst for everyone. Some of those that survived the 'pop' went on to build global digital empires.

At the same time the U.S. economy was beginning this 10-year boom, technology was about to deliver the world a phenomenon. On August 06 1991 Tim Berners-Lee published the worlds first web page. It described a project he was working on at the European Organization for Nuclear Research, CERN. That project was called 'World Wide Web.' People liked the idea; it caught on.

In 1991 there were around 2.6 million Internet users, mostly seeded by users of the Internet's previous incarnation ARPANET. By 2001 there would be over 400 million. Today the number of active Internet users has reached approximately 4.4 billion, that means around 57% of all people on the planet now use the Internet. It is not just people who use the Internet. Today approximately one-third of all Internet traffic is non-human in origin, the Internet of Things.

Throughout the '90s a whole new world of business opportunities was unfolding. It was like a return to the age of sail and discovery, explored through the window of Netscape Navigator. Entire new continents were free for colonization. Rich with opportunity, resources, and peril. The first settlers had arrived. The immigrant population was rapidly growing, giving birth to new generations. In 2001 Mark Prensky would coin the phrase that gave these new generations an identity. The Digital Natives.

Old world enterprises began to wake up to the rate of change. Everyone decided they needed a website. Whether or not they understood why or what to do with one. No one had a real plan. There was no concept of a digital strategy for most established companies. Everyone did seem to recognize that this new idea, the World Wide Web, could be either a tremendous boon or a curse of new competition. 

Financial speculation and Venture Capital investment in emerging companies went big hitting a peak in 2000 at the height of the Dot-Com bubble. That year the venture industry set a record for financing that would not be beaten until 2018 which saw $130.9 billion invested in US-based startups.

Everything was changing at an unprecedented rate. Financial speculation was a feeding frenzy. There was a domain name land-grab with people registering thousands of domain names in the belief they would one day be priceless.  In the middle of this gold rush, there was a group of people selling shovels and pickaxes; Software Developers and Engineers.

The information age had now arrived and with it a parallel world, in some cases such as on-line gaming, these were actual parallel worlds. In other cases, this new lense on global society was more subtle.

Geographic boundaries had merged or shifted. Information that might previously be censored by governments or corporate legislation was now openly available. Communities evolved and regrouped around new shared interests. Global news and media production were accessible to anyone with an idea to share. People now spent money on-line. There was a new global demand for technology-enabled products.

Perspectives on what had been previously considered 'I.T.' needed to change. For many CEOs and CFOs 'I.T.' was seen as a cost center responsible for ensuring the printers worked, and the Enterprise Resource Planning software was well maintained. That level of thinking regarding the role of technology in business was no longer fit for purpose. Technology and Internet technology had now become a mission-critical element of business operations.

Everyone was experiencing digital disruption, and nobody knew what the future would bring. The rate of innovation fueled by venture capital investment was both staggering and impossible to contend with for many existing firms. 

Microsoft, Apple, and Oracle were ahead of the disruption curve founding in 1975,1976 and 1977 respectively. Amazon was founded in 1994, eBay in 1995, Google and Paypal in 1998. The early millennium would see SpaceX and Linkedin founded in 2002, Facebook in 2004, Youtube in 2005. 2009 witnessed the founding of Uber and release of the cryptocurrency Bitcoin as open-source software by the fictitious and enigmatic Satoshi Nakamoto.

The rate of disruption has only increased its metabolism. In 2014  Aileen Lee founder of Cowboy Ventures wrote an article in on TechCrunch entitled 'Welcome To The Unicorn Club: Learning From Billion-Dollar Startups.' In that article, Aileen coined the phrase Unicorn to describe a privately invested company valued at over a billion dollars. The unicorn was intended as a metaphor to describe the rarity of such mythical beasts. Five years later and Unicorns aren't as rare as they used to be with 376 Unicorn companies worldwide. In 2018 alone eighty-one companies achieved Unicorn status.

Back in the mid-'90s, the approach taken by most firms towards product development needed to change. The accepted practice for how product development projects were both managed and funded needed to adapt to this new reality of a market place disrupted beyond recognition. The status quo was failing under the sheer pace of change and market ambiguity. A new paradigm for technology-enabled product development was required.

On 6 October 1995 as the dot-com bubble was beginning to balloon, at the OOPSLA conference in Austin, Texas, Ken Schwaber presented a talk. Ken outlined a framework he had co-authored with his friend and colleague Jeff Sutherland.

The framework was called 'Scrum.' Ken Schwaber and Jeff Sutherland published the paper 'SCRUM Software Development Process.' This paper captured lessons learned from applying a new approach to managing software development at Easel Corporation in 1993. Work carried out by Jeff Sutherland, John Scumniotales and Jeff McKenna.

The timing was perfect. The U.S. economy was mid-boom. The dot-com bubble had begun to bloat. The starting pistol had fired in the race for digital dollars. People were looking for a way to get things done faster.

In 1996, John Perry Barlow published A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace. It was a bellwether for attitudes of those involved in technology during the emergence of the World Wide Web. Agile was about to experience its genesis, although it would not be named Agile for another 6 years.

Authority over product development needed to be relinquished by corporate bureaucrats and replaced by product ownership; entrusted to those who knew how the technology worked. There was a model for this. 
In 1986 Hirotaka Takeuchi and Ikujiro Nonaka published an article in the Havard Busines Review entitled 'The New New Product Development Game.' 

Not only was this article a concise distillation of brilliant ideas; it would also prove to be prophetic. Start-up, autonomy, self-organizing cross-functional teams, co-location, multi-learning and management acting as 'venture capitalist.' Everything now considered 'Agile' is there. It also applies 'Scrum' as a metaphor for small multi-disciplined product development teams. It was precisely the metaphor people had been searching for.

Scrum offered a solution. Scrum also had a few things going for it. Scrum had a catchy name. Scrum was easy to understand. Scrum worked.

Kent Beck had also been working on ideas to revolutionize software development.  On 8 October 1999 Kent published Extreme Programming Explained. In that book, Kent described the state of the art in software development. It was a great book. Kent Beck outlined in detail the practices of contemporary software development and the ethos behind those practices. The insight and guidance have not dated. Kent also introduces the idea of a Coach, and how to recognize a good one.

Between 1999 and 2001 everyone was busy. The millennium bug was news, at times public speculation relating to the potential impact of the millennium bug bordered upon an 'end-of-world' cult.

From the 1960s until the 1980s, computer engineers had been shortening dates down to a two-digit code to represent the year within a 'datetime variable.' Computer storage was resource intensive; dates are referenced frequently when programming. For years programmers had omitted the 19 prefix for a given year, 76 instead of 1976. No one could be sure how these old programmes might be interpreted by hardware when the century clock ticked from 19 to 20.

The effect on banking, air transportation, and power plants was a genuine concern. It was also good for business with millions being spent to mitigate the problem.

In the event, there was only one real manifestation of the bug. That was an equipment failure in a nuclear energy facility in Ishikawa, Japan that ended without serious incident. 

The U.S. detected missile launches in Russia and falsely assumed those to be a result of the millennium bug affecting their missile launch detection system. The missile launches were authentic and a planned action in Russia's conflict with Chechnya; it was not the bug.

America presumably gave Russia the benefit of the doubt learning from Russia's own false alarm incident on 26 September 1983. When a bug in Russia's early warning system reported the launch of multiple ballistic nuclear missiles from bases in the United States towards Russia. 

That software bug came close to triggering a global thermonuclear war that would have brought 300,000 years of human civilization to an incendiary end. The resulting irradiated nuclear winter would likely have reset the clock on 3.5 billion years of natural evolution. Mankind owes its continued existence to the cool-headed professionalism of the Russian generals on duty that day. There has never been a more instructive argument for quality in software development.

The world did not end on 26 September 1983 or at 0000hrs on 01 January 2000, and so between 11-13 February 2001 at the Snowbird ski resort in Utah, there was a meeting of minds. A group of people came together to discuss the state of the software development industry. 

The group could not have been more ideally selected to work these ideas out. All were accomplished software professionals with a deep understanding of their craft. Out of respect and recognition, I list them all. I owe my career to these people. If you are reading this book as an Agile Coach yourself, you also do:

Kent Beck, Mike Beedle, Arie van Bennekum, Alistair Cockburn, Ward Cunningham, Martin Fowler, James Grenning, Jim Highsmith, Andrew Hunt, Ron Jeffries, Jon Kern, Brian Marick, Robert C. Martin, Steve Mellor, Ken Schwaber, Jeff Sutherland, Dave Thomas.

The subject of discussion for the summit at Snowbird was how to approach software development as a professional discipline. This group met to share ideas and produce a model for software development that would be fit for future purpose. They reached a consensus. For a group self-described organizational anarchists, this was both accomplishment and oxymoron. 

What this group produced was the Agile Manifesto.

#### Manifesto for Agile Software Development

*We are uncovering better ways of developing software by doing it and helping others do it. Through this work we have come to value:*

*Individuals and interactions over processes and tools.*

*Working software over comprehensive documentation.*

*Customer collaboration over contract negotiation.*

*Responding to change over following a plan.*

#### That is, while there is value in the items on the right, we value the items on the left more.

Underpinning this manifesto they also published the Twelve Principles of Agile Software.

#### We follow these principles:

*Our highest priority is to satisfy the customer through early and continuous delivery of valuable software.*

*Welcome changing requirements, even late in development. Agile processes harness change for the customer's competitive advantage.*

*Deliver working software frequently, from a  couple of weeks to a couple of months, with a  preference to the shorter timescale.*

*Business people and developers must work together daily throughout the project.*

*Build projects around motivated individuals. Give them the environment and support they need, and trust them to get the job done.*

*The most efficient and effective method of conveying information to and within a development team is face-to-face conversation.*

*Working software is the primary measure of progress.*

*Agile processes promote sustainable development. The sponsors, developers, and users should be able to maintain a constant pace indefinitely.*

*Continuous attention to technical excellence and good design enhances agility.*

*Simplicity--the art of maximizing the amount of work not done--is essential.*

*The best architectures, requirements, and designs emerge from self-organizing teams.*

*At regular intervals, the team reflects on how to become more effective, then tunes and adjusts its behavior accordingly.*


Agile had become a movement. The signatories of the Agile Manifesto had become the leaders of a new global tribe. The cohesion of that tribe in itself was made possible via the Internet. Agile went viral. 

The Agile Alliance was founded on the values and principles of the Agile Manifesto. Ken Schwaber was first to take the role as chairperson. 

On October 21, 2001, Ken Schwaber and Mike Beedle published Agile Software Development with Scrum. In so doing, they established the role of the Scrum Master described as Coach to the Agile team. The meme of the Agile Coach embedded in the collective conscious of the software development industry. 

Agile was now Agile with a capital 'A.' Agile had become a noun. Agile was a meme, what the ethologist Richard Dawkins would describe as a virus of the mind, spread through the medium of the World Wide Web. Like all successful viruses, Agile has been mutating ever since.

The Dot-Com bubble burst that year; the Dot-Com expansion began.




