

# 2. The Beautiful Game {#chapter-2}

Coaching is a strange profession. The role of the coach is commonly misunderstood, not least, by those who hire a coach. The raw material of the coaching profession is people. A coach guides others to achieve the most of themselves, to break their internal boundaries and overcome self-imposed limitations.

To clarify the relationship between myself and the people I coach, I describe them as 'players.' They are not my students or pupils. They are not my protégés and certainly not my disciples. They are the players of the game. It is not the Agile game; it is the product development game. It is a field game, the field of evolving technology.

Within the game, fast beats slow. Technical excellence is essential. The game rewards agility and punishes sloth. Knowledge beats ignorance. The game is unforgiving and fiercely competitive. The rules of the game change with ever-increasing frequency. This game has no place for amateurs. It is without question a team game.

A true Agile Coach understands the fundamental qualities of the game. Those are product, technology, and finance. Notice, I did not say people, process and tools. What I am describing is the game itself, not how we play the game. It is the New New Product Development Game.

In 2001 this game definitively turned pro sport. This is a high stakes game. 

The primary focus of this book will be coaching agile teams in the disciplines of product discovery and technical delivery. Before continuing, I want to share insight into some of the underlying financial forces that drive this industry. It is impossible to ignore the economic context agile teams operate within; it influences everything they do. It is this economic context that dictates the very need for agility.

I will give the companies I describe in this chapter their appropriate name, 'Information Age Companies.' These companies are often referred to as 'Technology Companies,' but that is a misnomer. Paper is a technology discovered around 100BC that has stood the test of time through many ages. Without a doubt, all information age companies still find a useful application for paper technology. 

The technologies these companies apply is not their defining characteristic; this may prove their most transient characteristic. It is the era within which these companies were established and their primary commodity that characterizes them, information.


/// content goes here

At the time of writing, this may sound like science fiction. I will even borrow a definition from the imagination Iain M. Banks., Sublimation. In Banks's universe the Sublimed are alien civilizations which have left the known dimensions of space-time behind to take up residence in higher dimensions.

Envision a future wherein the next cycle of global economic instability leads information age companies to index their value upon cryptocurrency as opposed to the U.S. dollar. An act of self-preservation, decided upon in microsecond consensus between respective corporate AI. There is no industry more predisposed to do so. A calculated departure from contemporary markets, the central banking system and fiat currency, another parallel world.

The very presence of information age companies in an industrial age economy is causing that same global economic instability. Lift the lid on this Schroedinger's cat, and you will discover she has had kittens.

If a single error in software programming can come so close to ending the world, line by line deliberate acts of software engineering may create a new one. The butterfly effect of Satoshi Nakamoto, The cathedral gives way to the bazaar, For want of a nail:

>For want of a nail the shoe was lost.

>For want of a shoe the horse was lost.

>For want of a horse the rider was lost.

>For want of a rider the message was lost.

>For want of a message the battle was lost.

>For want of a battle the kingdom was lost.

>And all for the want of a horseshoe nail.

It would be the establishment of a new global economy — Dot-Com bubble, the Dot-Com expansion, and the ultimate Dot-Com sublimation. 

Sublimed Unicorns.

Astonishing. It requires the quantumn fidelity of physical matter, of reality, with its innate qubit computing capability to derive such possibilities.

It is a game of infinite beauty.

